---
  title: "Surety:  Pros and Cons and Alternative forms of Surety"
  date: "2014-01-04T00:20:00+02:00"
  publishdate: "2014-01-04T00:20:00+02:00"
  url: "/legally-speaking/item/202-surety-pros-and-cons-and-alternative-forms-of-surety"
---

A suretyship is a frequently used risk-mitigating mechanism and involves three parties – the creditor, the principal debtor, and the surety. It is important to understand this concept as most people will be party to a suretyship in some or other capacity in their lifetime. It is a contract between the creditor and the surety, in his personal capacity, in terms of which the surety undertakes to fulfil the obligations due to the creditor by the principal debtor, in the event that the principal debtor fails in whole or in part to fulfil the obligations himself. Essentially, the surety agrees to step into the principal debtor’s shoes if that debtor can no longer fill those shoes financially, so to speak, vis-à-vis his creditor. A suretyship is a contract and the normal requirements for concluding a valid contract must be complied with. 
<!--more-->
A suretyship contract is a useful instrument to protect the creditor against the loss associated with the risk of non-performance by the principal debtor. Once a valid suretyship contract is concluded, there will be two debtors who will be liable and bound for the same debt. In practice, these two agreements are usually embodied in one document. An example of a suretyship contract is where A is indebted to B for a loan amount, and C agrees in a written contract to stand<a name="LPHit9"></a> surety for the debt in case A does not repay the loan. In the event of non-payment by A, C will be held liable for the repayment of the loan. It is clear from this example that the principal debtor remains liable for the obligations arising out of the main agreement, and the surety’s obligations activate when the principal debtor fails to perform his or her obligations under the main agreement.

A number of possible issues must be dealt with by a creditor when entering into a suretyship agreement. In many instances, the creditor can only claim the performance of the obligation from the surety if the principal debtor fails to perform in terms of the principal obligation. This can be addressed by making provision for the surety to bind himself as surety and co-principal debtor. The surety in this scenario is jointly and severally liable to the creditor with the principal debtor. A valid surety agreement must be embodied in a written document. A verbal suretyship agreement will not be binding on the parties. The validity of a suretyship contract is dependent on the validity of the main agreement between the creditor and the principal debtor, which indicates the auxiliary nature of this legal mechanism.

It is vital when signing as surety for a principal debtor that the obligations of the surety in terms of the agreement are fully understood. It is important to satisfy yourself as to the identities of the parties concerned, the nature and extent of the debt, and the period for which you can be held liable. The wording “continuing covering suretyship” for example can potentially bind the surety in perpetuity for the debts of the co-principal debtor.

The following instruments are alternative forms of contractual security to a deed of suretyship:

1.  A guarantee is a form of security in terms of which a guarantor agrees to make payment to a beneficiary if a principal defaults in the performance of some or other obligations to the beneficiary that the principal undertook. For example, A and B enter into a building construction contract, and as security for the due performance of B’s obligation under the building construction contract, bank C issues a guarantee in favour of A.
2.  A warranty is a contractual term in which one party gives an undertaking to another party that specific facts or conditions are true or will happen. For example, A gives B a warranty that A has the required licence to operate a particular business.
3.  An indemnity agreement can be described as a contractual undertaking between two parties in terms of which one of the parties in a contract is exempted from loss that may occur as a result of a specified event. For example, A agrees to indemnify B in the event that A does not have the licence to operate a particular business.
4.  An insurance contract protects the insured from financial loss associated with the event insured against, in return for payment of a premium. For example, Insurance company A agrees to compensate B for a financial loss that B may suffer due B’s asset being stolen, against payment by B of regular premiums to insurance company A.